Starbucks: Global Coffee Giant Has New Growth Plans

Walter Loeb Senior Contributor
I cover major developments in the retail industry.

 
 
Jan 31, 2013, 09:50am EST


  This article is more than 9 years old.


There is a lot of excitement emanating from the Seattle based coffee giant. Just a year ago a new blend of coffee called blonde roast was introduced. This attracted new customers who prefer a lighter blend. In addition there is more food for breakfast and lunch including more baked goods coming soon due to
 

New!
Follow this author to improve your content experience.
Got it!

And maybe upward?. (Image credit: Getty Images via @daylife)
 
the company’s acquisition of La Boulange, and juices too with Evolution Fresh.

Starbucks is in an enviable position – it has about 18,000 stores world- wide of which roughly 13,000 are in the North America and 255 are in New York City. This dominant position enables the Company to try new
 
ideas all the time. One of these initiatives is the opening of the first Tazo tea store in Seattle’s University Village and the company recently has acquired Teavana Holdings, which will support a future expansion of the tea store concept. Management believes it is a $40 billion market.

While the acquisitions have played some role in the Company’s growth including the important purchase of Seattle’s Best Coffee, much of the store growth has been organic. Under the leadership of Howard Schultz, President and CEO, the company has not only grown in the United States, world-wide expansion has been spectacular. Today Starbucks is in 62 countries around the globe, including most recently India and there are more to come.
The potential for ongoing growth in China is important for Starbucks. Currently there are more than 3,000 stores in China, and it is one of the fastest growing countries for the Company. In the first fiscal quarter of 2013 the China/Asia Pacific segment alone achieved sales of $214.3 Million, an increase of 28% over the previous year with comparable store growth in the region rising 11%, contributing to the 6% same store growth worldwide. This was the 12th consecutive quarter of comparable store growth in excess of 5%.	Capitalizing on the favorable trends in same store sales, the Company will open about 1300 stores world-wide in fiscal 2013. About half of the stores – around 600 – will be opened in China. Fifty percent of these stores will be licensed. They are planning for China to be the Company’s second largest market by 2014.

Despite the rapid growth in Chinese store fronts, as a percent of total, physical growth has slowed. Wisely, the company is focusing on productivity through new products and a very important expansion
 
through the grocery channel, where they are making great strides with K- Cups and other products that give their brand a presence in consumers’ homes.

In my opinion, many customers have made a Starbucks store their daily headquarters, using the free Internet connections to communicate with their friends – and this will continue as exciting new menu items are added. In addition they can increasingly find Starbucks products in the grocery aisles, and they are taking advantage of that too.
A recent survey by American Express/SAP ranks Starbucks 49th among the Top 100 global retailers. Fortune Magazine ranks it among the best companies to work for. Not bad for a coffee roaster from Seattle.
