Starbucks Raises Forecast as Net Earnings Rise 25%

By Reuters

    Jan. 23, 2014

Starbucks on Thursday reported that quarterly sales at established stores in its Americas region increased, but they fell short of analysts’ expectations.

Nevertheless, Starbucks, the world’s biggest coffee chain, raised its earnings-per-share forecast for its 2014 fiscal year. It now expects a range of $2.59 to $2.67, up from $2.55 to $2.65, and its shares climbed 0.8 percent to $73.96 in after-hours trading.

Global sales at Starbucks cafes open at least 13 months were up 5 percent, versus analysts’ average estimate for a 5.9 percent rise, according to Consensus Metrix. That figure included a 5 percent increase for the Americas region, which contributes much of Starbucks revenue. Analysts, on average, had expected a 6.4 percent rise from the region.

Advertisement
Continue reading the main story

Last fiscal year, sales at established Starbucks stores in the Americas region were up 8 percent in the fourth quarter and up 9 percent in the third quarter.

“It’s hard to really be to critical, especially when you compare what we’ve seen and what we’re about to see in the coming weeks,” said Jack Russo, an analyst at Edward Jones, referring to the recent spate of disappointing earnings reports from restaurants and retailers. “Growth is hard to find.”

Expectations had been muted before the release of results, in part because the company, based in Seattle, has been on a growth tear that many analysts said could not go on forever.

    Dig deeper into the moment. 

Special offer: Subscribe for $1 a week.

“Holiday 2013 was the first in which many traditional brick-and-mortar retailers experienced in-store foot traffic give way to online shopping in a major way,” Howard D. Schultz, the president and chief executive of Starbucks, said in a statement.

The Data firm ShopperTrak last week said shopper traffic in the United States fell 14.6 percent during the holiday season.

Starbucks’ net earnings increased 25 percent to $540.7 million, or 71 cents a share, for its fiscal first quarter, which ended on Dec. 29. Excluding a litigation credit of 2 cents a share, Starbucks’ profit matched Wall Street’s average estimate of 69 cents a share, according to Thomson Reuters estimates.